## Compilers

A following variation of Stop&Copy is called Generational. The object lifetimes
are bimodal and uses *n* spaces instead of 2. For the most part, if you allocate
some memory you will likely use it and then throw it away very quickly, or you
allocate it and it stays around almost forever. It is usually small bits of
memory that are used quickly and large chunks that are kept around for longer.
Therefore with our *n* regions we can allocate the smallest objects in region-0
and large objects in region-*n*. Then active data can be copied from region-i to
region-(i+1) when a region runs out. This can cause a garbage collection
'cascade' and in addition, when there is no space in region-*n* there is nowhere
else to copy to and a different strategy is required. You must also fix
inter-generational references - this can means you need to track operations
which update pointers, each region will have a small table that contains
information about extra-region references. You must then use 'mark & sweep' in
region-*n*. Instead of promoting data as soon as you run out, you can employ
'tenuring', whereby you only promote after the data survives *k* collections.
This prevents promoting newly allocated data that may be deallocated shortly.
The pros of this method are you get fast, frequent GC and it plays nicely with
virtual memory because your page accesses in your program are similar to your
GC. However your garbage collection does become very complicated.  There is a
variant of this developed by Oracle called the Garbage-First Garbage Collector.

As mentioned in the previous GC strategy is known as Mark+Sweep. The key here is
to mark all live data and then perform a sweep to collect inactive data.  As the
sweep goes through we can clear the marks and either add unused memory to a free
list, or perform compaction to create contiguous unused memory. You must leave
forwarding pointers too. This recovers the cyclic pointers and makes use of all
available memory. However it scans active data twice, once to mark and once to
sweep, plus scans the inactive data once and also potentially can mess up VM
performance as page tables/TLB's will need to refreshed once we have compacted
memory.

Thus far all methods of GC have been *precise*, that is they can prove whether
or not a given piece of memory is inactive. Another method that can be used is
'conservative' garbage collection where we simply guess whether given data is
live or not, this is imprecise and does not guarantee that it will collect all
inactive memory. This method will divide memory up into pages - the same as
virtual memory system - and if any piece of memory is active within that page,
then keep the entire page, no matter what is in the rest of it. It checks the
pointer against heap bounds, then breaking the address into a page
address+offset. Then we can look this up in the page table, if the page is not
in use we can ignore it, and if the page table entry is nonzero then we can
computer the object start address and set the mark bit in the page descriptor.
Then when we sweep, we can move large objects and unmarked pages go to the free
list and remove the marks from others. This will work with any system, requires
no type information, pointers can be to anywhere and there is no reallocation,
it also behaves well with VM performance. The disadvantage is that objects may
be retained longer than necessary.

There are also static, or compile time region analysis methods that can
potentially decide how long storage is needed for. This means objects with the
same lifetime can be allocated and deallocated all at once. This is supposed to
automate the programmers job but without the mistakes. Non-standard analysis
developed in 1990s by Mads Tofte and Jean-Pierre Talpin. It is easier to check
whether something is lifetime safe rather than infer that same information. The
steps are to:

- Estimate lifetimes of heap data structures
- Group by the lifetime
- Arrange for simultaneous deallocation
- Order regions by lifetime (stack)
- Default solution (bottom region) uses classic GC

Annotations take two forms:

- `e at r` means the expression `e` produces a value to be stored in region `r`
- `letregion r {e}` means allocate a new region `r` with scope and extent `e`

These are not for programmer use, the analysis decorates the program,
source->source transformation. The limitations are that the size of a value must
be known at compile time, it is no good for dynamic structures. Procedural
values mean that analysis must handle extended dynamic extents. It is critical
to prove absence of premature deallocation but can be very difficult. It is not
necessarily a replacement for GC but a complement to. Not all programs are
'region friendly' but combination is a form of intelligent generation
scavenging. Performance results are not conclusive but the total number of
garbage collections are reduced significantly and therefore runtime is reduced.
In practice you can see Cyclone - which is a safe dialect of C and Rust.

Many legacy applications are written in memory unsafe languages for example C or
C++, this means that performance is increased however it can be error and
vulnerability prone. You can use Purify and Valgrind to try and mitigate these
problems or using conservative GC you can deal with dangling pointers, invalid
frees and double frees. Dynamic checks can eliminate the rest of the problems
with memory management, with an overhead.

# Virtual Machines

A virtual machine is a general term to describe an idealised architecture that
to an extent mimics hardware. Form and representation of data are not fixed and
can be design decisions.

Control in the tree interpreter uses the control mechanism of the interpreting
language. Consequently the interpreted language can become limited by the
interpreting language. Therefore control needs to be separate from the host
language. Control can become explicit by being written as a data structure, by
using three items `C, E, K`, where C is the next expression, E is the current
environment and K is the next continuation. You can therefore have a set of
rules that does the transform `<C, E, K, R> -> <C', E', K', R'>` where `R'`
passes the result to the next continuation.

A continuation describes all form of control.

- Plan goto: transfers to C, keep E.
- dressed up gotos (repeat, while, until, do) - as above
- Function call: save C, E and K, transfer to C' either pick up E' or extend
    current
- return: transfer to C, pick up E and K
- throw: select matching exception, transfer to C, restore E and K
- thread suspend: save C, E and K
- thread resume: transfer to C, restore E and K
