### Networking

# DSL

If the problem with Ethernet is overcoming interference or noise on the wire,
why can't we just use a bigger signal i.e. larger voltage? There are
unfortunately many problems with this, firstly that larger voltages mean larger
costs (more power, better insulation on the wires, larger wires etc). Bigger
signals will themselves cause more interference with the rest of the environment
and in particular with other people's wires. Wires are laid in bundles that only
diverge when they get close to the home (the *distribution point*), this can
cause **crosstalk**, where the signal from one wire in the bundle interferes with
the signal in other wires. *Vectoring* is a technique that is an attempt to
reduce this interference by injecting the appropriate amount of inverted signal
into everybody's wire to cancel out the crosstalk from other signals, this is
though quite computationally difficult. Another solution could be to move away
from copper wires and electrical signals.

Optical fibre cable can be used instead of copper wires. And ideally, there
would be high-bandwidth optical fibre to our home. Optical fibre is not subject
to electrical interference like copper wires and can carry huge (terabits?)
datarates with no possibility of electrical crosstalk. It is currently
economically infeasible to provide everybody with a fibre connection: too much
digging up the road would be needed. This is called the *last mile problem*: how
to bridge the gap between the local telephone exchange and the final user.  This
would be FTTB/FTTP or FTTH, which means just "fibre to the ..."
house/building/premises. Currently the cost effective solutions is FTTC which is
to the cabinet, and then use a DSL over the existing copper wire to the home.
VDSL2 is used on the copper from the cabinet to the home with an up to 80Mb/s
downlink. Vectoring, if successful, might be able to improve rates to 100Mb/s.
Another development is FTTdp, or fibre to the distribution point where the fibre
cables go to from the cabinet to the underground/telephone pole where the cable
bundle split individual wires to the premises. A box at the DP converts the
optical signal to an electrical signal along the final copper loop to the
premises. Using G.fast, another DSL for very short loops. This can provide up
to 300-500Mb.

The cable TV system where available is also used to deliver Internet
connectivity. It is another fibre and copper hybrid with fibre to cabinets and
then cable to the home. However the copper wires used is much better quality
coaxial cable that is well screened against interference and crosstalk and so
the datarates it supports are much higher. 

The next physical medium we look at is wireless. Wireless networks have existed
for a long time: for example cellular telephone systems. Everything wireless
is overseen by national and international bodies we can't have a free-for-all in
a wide area shared resource. One wireless system could for example affect
another hundreds or thousands of miles away: there must be some sort of
cooperation. So some wireless systems are only allowed with very low power e.g.
WiFi. Europe has the European Telecommunication Standards Institute(ETSI), the
USA has the Federal Communication Commission (FCC). Such bodies manage the
airwaves allocating various frequencies to various purposes ensuring minimal
interference between the competing concerns for parts of the spectrum. 

The IEEE 802.11 group of standards deal with "wireless Ethernet" more commonly
known as WiFi. In principle much like CSMA/CD over wireless but with some extra
problems unique to wireless. The shared medium is now all around, not just
within a wire.  So signals from multiple networks can interfere not just the
hosts within one network. Wireless networks generally have fairly high error
rates due to interference from electrically noisy environments, signal
reflections etc. So the achievable bandwidth is dependent on the current
environment. Wireless networks also generate interference by themselves so must
be controlled. In 802.11 the allowed power of transmission is generally kept
quite low by the standards bodies to minimise interference. A typical laptop
will transmit at about 32mW and can read a signal as low as 0.000000001mW, in
comparison a digital TV mast transmits at 100kW. Therefore the range of WiFi
networks is often quite limited which can cause complications. When we have
wireless networks we get the *hidden host* problem. If both A and C are
connected to network B, and B is on the edge of their range, so both can
communicate to B but cannot see each other and therefore do not know if their
packets are colliding. The limited ranges mean that CSMA/CD in the form present
in Ethernet will not work for wireless. In addition as packets are broadcast,
wireless networks are intrinsically insecure, so extra effort must be taken over
security and authentication.

There are many parts to the 802.11 standard, including 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g,
802.11n, 802.11ac, 802.11ad. Other parts like 11c, 11d, 11e, 11f, 11h and 11i
deal with things liek power management quality of service, security and
authentication and so on. The original standard specified signal rates of up to
2Mb/s up to 100m indoors and 300m outdoors. There was an infra-red mode as well
as a radio mode but this has not been widely implemented. 802.11b extended this
to rates of 5.5Mb/s and 11Mb/s. They use the unlicensed 2.4GHz waveband.
