### Networking

# Link Layer

Some popular link layer protocols are SLIP (Serial Line Internet Protocol) is an
early protocol used on modems to encapsulate IP traffic over serial telephone
lines. This is a point to point network. A very simple frame encapsulation with
a terminating byte `0xc0` and often a starting `0xc0` byte too. We can use byte
stuffing to send the `0xc0` if our data contains it. Again this expands the data
in a minor way but enables transparent transmission of data. There was no frame
size limit but the specification suggested at least 1006 bytes. 296 bytes was
the most common (40 bytes of TCP/IP headers plus 256 bytes of data). Larger
frames have relatively less overhead but at 9600b/s, 1006 bytes takes about 1
sec to transmit. If there is a bulk transfer of full-sized frames at the same
time as an interactive session the session's frames would have to wait 0.5
seconds on average to get through, much too slow. An interactive response of
over 100-200ms is felt to be too slow. 296 is intended as a compromise, not too
slow for interactive and not too small for bulk transfers, although it's not
particularly good at either. On more modern modems it was increased to 1500
bytes. SLIP has several problems. Only IP in the next layer is supported as
there is no type field in the frame. The ends must have pre-agreed IP addresses,
there is no mechanism for agreeing addresses, there is also no checksum and the
data could easily get corrupted especially on noisy telephone lines, finally
there is no authentication. 

Thus the Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) was developed, as the name suggests, this
is a point-to-point network. It has three parts, a framing layout for packets, a
link control protocol (LCP) for managing and configuring links and a set of
network control protocols (NCP) to manage network layer specific options.

PPP packets look like:

```
+-------+---------+---------+-------------+--------------+--------+-------+
| 7E(1) | Addr(1) | Ctrl(1) | Protocol(2) | Data(<=1500) | CRC(2) | 7E(1) |
+-------+---------+---------+-------------+--------------+--------+-------+
```

It begins and ends with a 7E, the address and control are fixed at FF and 03
respectively, this was originally to allow flexibility but turned out not to be
needed. Data is upto 1500 bytes but can be negotiated with NCP. Bytes are
stuffed to escape special values. NCP can negotiate extras like compression and
framesize. It also includes authentication. It was originally designed to be
used over telephone modems PPP is still actively used e.g. in PPP over Ethernet
(PPPoE) as it allows authentication of a connection. Current FTTC products use
PPPoE over VDSL to pass authentication to the ISP.

Several other link layers exist, Ethernet has it's own link layer frames for a
local area network, and Wi-Fi shares the same one. In addition there are link
layers for carrying data over long distances at high data rates, an example of
which is Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) which was popular for time, it was
designed by telephone engineers and it was really a connection oriented digital
voice network into which you could squeeze data packets. This was 'replaced' by
Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) which was designed to address the
shortcomings of ATM and is much better suited to modern data networks as it was
design by network engineers to be a general long distance network.

---

In Ethernet there are link layer addresses that allow a frame to get from source
to intended destination. This works well enough when the destination is on the
local Ethernet network, not so much when the destination is non-local. It's not
feasible to treat the entire world as a shared medium and broadcast the packet
to everybody. Moreover the destination might not be an Ethernet and therefore
might not have an Ethernet address. Therefore we need hardware independent
addresses to identify hosts that work independently of the physical network. In
the Internet Protocol these addresses live in the network layer. The network
layer used in the Internet Protocol is called the Internet Protocol(IP).

IP has the major function of dealing with routing, determining where a packet
should go. Amongst other things IP has network layer addresses, these are
hardware independent and have the same format everywhere. Each host on the
Internet has an IP address that identifies it uniquely over the entire Internet,
originally anyway (NAT/IPv4). The packet is very large.

The source and destination addresses are both four bytes (32 bit value) long.
For convenience it is written as four 8 bit decimal numbers from 0.0.0.0 to
255.255.255.255. The dots are purely to make the number visually easier to read.
More importantly there is a structure in an IP address which helps with the
routing. The first half is a 16 bit network address and the latter half is the
host address which identifies a single machine on the University network. Note
it's not always split up this way. This division into network and host parts
helps in routing as all packets destined for the University of Bath can be
routed in the same manner. Only when a packet is reaches the University is some
local knowledge of the network needed. The host part of this address splits
further into subnet addresses which helps with local routing. The main point is
that the IP address is independent of Ethernet and so can be used regardless of
the hardware used.

Now there is a new problem, suppose I want to send a packet to an address on the
local network. The data is encapsulated in an IP packet with my IP address as
the source and the destination address in the destination field. The IP packet
must be further encapsulated in a hardware frame, Ethernet in this example. The
OS can't send the packet on the physical medium until it knows the Ethernet
address of the destination. Ethernet does not know about IP addresses and IP
does not know about Ethernet addresses. 

There needs to be some kind of address discovery so given the IP address we can
find the corresponding Ethernet address. Enter *ARP*, the Address Resolution
Protocol. ARP is a very simple link-layer protocol that broadcasts a special
frame that asks who has a particular IP address. All hosts on the local network
that hear this broadcast and the host with that address replies with the
Ethernet address. There is a security problem here, known as ARP poisoning. The
OS gets the ARP reply and can now use this information to write teh correct
address in the Ethernet frame. Only now can the original packet be sent. We
don't want to do this for every packet we send so there is an ARP cache kept by
the kernel that records the relation. Entries in the cache time out and are
removed after a time limit.
