# Networking

### NAT

NAT has helped immensely to mitigate the address exhaustion problem. Previously
every host on a network would need a separate public IP address. Now all your
home appliances can share just one public address. Problems arise when the data
in the packet contains IP addresses that will be used to set up new connections.
For example, FTP. Originally FTP would send an IP address to the server to
indicate where to set up a new connection. In our example this would be its
private unroutable address that the external server couldn't contact. The
gateway could also be intelligent enough to look inside the data and know where
the IP addresses are to be found and rewrite them. Not many protocols do this
these days but those that do must be treated specially by the NAT gateway. This
is a violation of layering in the application. NAT is very widely used as it is
so effective. It allows you to have many machines but only use one public
address. Many mobile phone companies are using carrier grade NAT to supply IP
connectivity to the millions of phones they manage. Without NAT public IP
addresses would have run out years ago. NAT does have associated costs, there is
additional complexity in the gateway software, and there are scalability
problems in the gateway tracking large numbers of connections and bad
interactions with some protocols. There are also difficulties in making
end-to-end connections when both ends are behind a NAT gateway. You can also no
longer identify a host uniquely from it's IP address - which LE doesn't like.
External hosts can't initiate connects to hosts behind NAT, so you can't run
servers on hosts behind the NAT. However this invisibility is often regarded as
a good security feature. This can be worked around though not neatly. NAT is the
reason the Internet didn't grind to a halt but it did cause people to stop
looking for a better solution. The next approach to IP address exhaustion
problem is to change IP itself.

The next approach is called IPv6, this is slowly growing in use but it will take
a while to supplant IPv4. IPv6 has 128 bit addresses, with CIDR-style allocation
only. IPv6 was designed with a few things in mind.

- have a larger address space
- reduce the size of router tables
- simplify the protocol so routers can process packets faster
- provide security and authentication
- pay proper attention to the type of service (DS)
- have better multicasting support
- have mobile hosts with fixed IP addresses
- allow room for evolution of the protocol
- permit IPv4 and IPv6 to coexist during the transition

The first field is the version field, and is 4 bits, containing the number 6.
This is identical in position to IPv4 and can be used to distinguish packets in
mixed version environments. (In an Ethernet frame IPv4 has protocol number 0800
whereas IPv6 has 86DD but remember you might be using a different physical layer
that does not give the type of it's data).

Traffic class, 8 bits. This is very similar to TOS (DS) in v4.

Flow label, 20 bits. Allows routers to recognise packets in a single flow. It
can be thought of as a virtual circuit identifier.

Payload length, 16 bits. The number of bytes following the fixed 40 byte header.
Unlike v4 does not include the header in the count.

Next header, 8 bits. Like the protocol field in v4 but also allows for optional
header fields, if any. 

Hop limit, 8 bits. The TTL field renamed to make it clear

Source and destination addresses, 128 bits each.

This is four times as long as v4 addresses.

2^128 = 3 * 10^38 is enough for an address for every molecule on the surface of
the Earth. There are unicast, multicast and anycast addresses. Addresses are
typically written in hexadecimal with colon separators. The :: may appear once
as a shorthand for a string of 0s. The University of Bath has been allocated
2001:0630:00e1::/48. Meaning 128-48=80 bits of addresses for hosts on the
University network. 2^80 = 1.2*10^24, which as about 280 trillion times the size
of the whole current IPv4 Internet.

In IPv6 there are no fragmentation fields. A router will never fragment but just
drop the packet and send back a packet too big message to the source. The source
can then send smaller packets. Processing within a router is therefore much
simpler and packets can be sent on much faster. Every IPv6 host is required to
do path MTU discovery.

The flow label was intended to help group packets by session so routers can
always send packets with same flow label to the same place. There is no header
or checksum as there are checksums in other layers and the header is always 40
bytes. Also we don't have to recompute the checksum in every router as the TTL
decreases, this is faster. v4 has 13 fixed fields whereas v6 has only 8, this is
much simpler for a router to process. v6 addresses are 4 times the length, but
the header is only twice as long.
