### Networking

# DSL

If the problem with Ethernet is overcoming interference or noise on the wire,
why can't we just use a bigger signal i.e. larger voltage? There are
unfortunately many problems with this, firstly that larger voltages mean larger
costs (more power, better insulation on the wires, larger wires etc). Bigger
signals will themselves cause more interference with the rest of the environment
and in particular with other people's wires. Wires are laid in bundles that only
diverge when they get close to the home (the *distribution point*), this can
cause **crosstalk**, where the signal from one wire in the bundle interferes with
the signal in other wires. *Vectoring* is a technique that is an attempt to
reduce this interference by injecting the appropriate amount of inverted signal
into everybody's wire to cancel out the crosstalk from other signals, this is
though quite computationally difficult. Another solution could be to move away
from copper wires and electrical signals.

Optical fibre cable can be used instead of copper wires. And ideally, there
would be high-bandwidth optical fibre to our home. Optical fibre is not subject
to electrical interference like copper wires and can carry huge (terabits?)
datarates with no possibility of electrical crosstalk. It is currently
economically infeasible to provide everybody with a fibre connection: too much
digging up the road would be needed. This is called the *last mile problem*: how
to bridge the gap between the local telephone exchange and the final user.  This
would be FTTB/FTTP or FTTH, which means just "fibre to the ..."
house/building/premises. Currently the cost effective solutions is FTTC which is
to the cabinet, and then use a DSL over the existing copper wire to the home.
VDSL2 is used on the copper from the cabinet to the home with an up to 80Mb/s
downlink. Vectoring, if successful, might be able to improve rates to 100Mb/s.
Another development is FTTdp, or fibre to the distribution point where the fibre
cables go to from the cabinet to the underground/telephone pole where the cable
bundle split individual wires to the premises. A box at the DP converts the
optical signal to an electrical signal along the final copper loop to the
premises. Using G.fast, another DSL for very short loops. This can provide up
to 300-500Mb.

The cable TV system where available is also used to deliver Internet
connectivity. It is another fibre and copper hybrid with fibre to cabinets and
then cable to the home. However the copper wires used is much better quality
coaxial cable that is well screened against interference and crosstalk and so
the datarates it supports are much higher. 

The next physical medium we look at is wireless. Wireless networks have existed
for a long time: for example cellular telephone systems. Everything wireless
is overseen by national and international bodies we can't have a free-for-all in
a wide area shared resource. One wireless system could for example affect
another hundreds or thousands of miles away: there must be some sort of
cooperation. So some wireless systems are only allowed with very low power e.g.
WiFi. Europe has the European Telecommunication Standards Institute(ETSI), the
USA has the Federal Communication Commission (FCC). Such bodies manage the
airwaves allocating various frequencies to various purposes ensuring minimal
interference between the competing concerns for parts of the spectrum. 

The IEEE 802.11 group of standards deal with "wireless Ethernet" more commonly
known as WiFi. In principle much like CSMA/CD over wireless but with some extra
problems unique to wireless. The shared medium is now all around, not just
within a wire.  So signals from multiple networks can interfere not just the
hosts within one network. Wireless networks generally have fairly high error
rates due to interference from electrically noisy environments, signal
reflections etc. So the achievable bandwidth is dependent on the current
environment. Wireless networks also generate interference by themselves so must
be controlled. In 802.11 the allowed power of transmission is generally kept
quite low by the standards bodies to minimise interference. A typical laptop
will transmit at about 32mW and can read a signal as low as 0.000000001mW, in
comparison a digital TV mast transmits at 100kW. Therefore the range of WiFi
networks is often quite limited which can cause complications. When we have
wireless networks we get the *hidden host* problem. If both A and C are
connected to network B, and B is on the edge of their range, so both can
communicate to B but cannot see each other and therefore do not know if their
packets are colliding. The limited ranges mean that CSMA/CD in the form present
in Ethernet will not work for wireless. In addition as packets are broadcast,
wireless networks are intrinsically insecure, so extra effort must be taken over
security and authentication.

There are many parts to the 802.11 standard, including 802.11a, 802.11b,
802.11g, 802.11n, 802.11ac, 802.11ad. Other parts like 11c, 11d, 11e, 11f, 11h
and 11i deal with things like power management quality of service, security and
authentication and so on. The original standard specified signal rates of up to
2Mb/s up to 100m indoors and 300m outdoors. There was an infra-red mode as well
as a radio mode but this has not been widely implemented. 802.11b extended this
to rates of 5.5Mb/s and 11Mb/s. They use the unlicensed 2.4GHz waveband. This
means that you don't need to apply for a license to use that frequency at low
power. This was a frequency that was otherwise unusable commercial and is
subject to interference from microwave ovens. And the frequency fell within the
capabilities of low power chips that were able to be built at the time. Some of
the standards use the 5GHz waveband. Also there is the 802.11ad uses a 60GHz
waveband, for 6.75Gb/s, known as WiGig. Improvements are achieved through more
sophisticated encodings and using more wireless channels simultaneously. Each
will fall back to previous standards to maintain compatibility. For example,
60GHz will not go through walls, so 11ad falls back to 11ac if you move to the
next room. 

802.11 hardware is branded WiFi which is a certificate of interoperability given
to manufacturers whose equipment demonstrably works with other manufacturers',
this is administered by the WiFi Alliance. The bits in 802.11 are not simply
transmitted over the air like a radio station there is a lot of interference to
overcome. Instead the signal is spread over many frequencies using a variety of
techniques collectively called spread spectrum. The allocated frequency band is
split into 14 overlapping 22MHz channels each centred on specified frequencies.
Most of Europe allows you to use 13, North America allows 11 and Japan allows 14
channels. These channels are 5MHz apart so neighbouring channels overlap and
interfere therefore you need to take care which channels you use. You should
separate channels by at least 2 to reduce interference. Separate by 4 to have no
interference at all. This means you can have three co-located networks on 1, 6
and 11. Separating networks physically it gives much more leeway. Separating by
1 is acceptable if the networks are more than 40m apart. Adjacent channels are
OK over 100m. Channels can of course be reused when the networks are
sufficiently separated.

More subtle channel allocations allow a little overlap e.g. using channels 1 and
3 that have a little interference but a greater overall aggregate bandwidth.
802.11 uses carrier sense, multiple access, collision avoidance (CSMA/CA)
similar to CSMA/CD in Ethernet but with a **big** difference. It starts by doing
carrier sense, much like Ethernet for the common case of non-hidden hosts. If
free, you can just send a packet, if it's busy wait until the end of the
transmission and then enter a *contention period* which is delay of a random
period before going back to carrier sense. The contention period is the
collision avoidance, the random wait means that several hosts wanting to
transmit are unlikely to all start transmitting simultaneously. This tries to
avoid a collision in the first place rather than detecting one after the fact.
As such it cannot guarantee no collisions so we need more. Therefore on
successful receipt of a packet a host will broadcast an ACK packet. This
essentially just says that everything went fine and there was no collision. If
the sender never receives an ACK so it will need to resend the process, starting
from the CSMA/CA. It uses CA rather than CD in Ethernet because with wireless
collisions are very hard to detect. Detecting another hosts signal on a wire is
easy as the power of it's signal is roughly the same as yours, however for WiFi
the power could be anything depending on how far that host is from you, your
signal could completely drown out the colliding signal and make it undetectable.

To help with the visibility problem there is optional RTS/CTS handshaking.
Before sending a data packet the source can send a Request To Send packet to the
AP. If the destination is happy it responds with a Clear to Send. Every other
host will see this and know that A is transmitting now. There is additional
information so the other hosts will know how long they need to wait. This means
there is a lot of latency overhead before data starts to be transmitted and this
is why it can be turned on and off. There is also a compromise where RTS and CTS
is enabled for large packets only, thus you get the overhead for packets where
there is little overhead compared to packet size. Although the advertised rates
for 802.11 standards are up to 54Mb/s for 802.11g for example, these are
signalling rates not the data rates. The signalling rate is the raw bit rate
over the airwaves, a lot of this gets consumed in overheads. 802.11g more
realistically gives about 20Mb/s. 

While the use of access points is common this is not the only way to set up a
wireless network. There are also Ad-Hoc configurations or Independent Basic
Service Set (IBSS), which are point-to-point networks meaning that each host can
communicate independently. The access point method is more common because it is
easier to wire into the Internet. This is more expensive to set up due to the
cost of AP but covers a larger area. There is also something called the Extended
Service Set which connects several APs by a wired network. This allows hosts to
roam and they can be configured to handoff automatically between APs if the
required authentication infrastructure is set-up. An ESS can cover as large an
area as you would like. 

Wireless packets are readable by anybody in the neighbourhood so security is
essential in a wireless network. Original 802.11 employed the Wired Equivalent
Privacy (WEP) encryption scheme. Both ends of a communication share a secret key
that is used to encrypt the traffic between them. WEP is now easily breakable
after collecting a modest amount of traffic the system can be broken. WiFi
Protected Access (WPA) was developed as an interim fix designed to work on the
existing hardware, known as 802.11i. This introduced better secret key
management (Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP), with RC4) and has a
different key each packet. It turns out that this was also breakable so today we
should use WPA2 (CCMP using AES). CCMP is Counter Cipher Mode with Block
Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol. AES is just an encryption
algorithm. WPA2 needs additional hardware support over WPA and WEP but all new
equipment does it.

You must also set up authentication, and two ways that you might do this are
WPA-Personal, also called WPA-PSK where an access point has a secret key and a
host authenticates directly with the AP using the secret key. WPA-Enterprise
requires a separate authentication server(typically RADIUS) that the AP will
contact, much more fiddly to manage but allows roaming across an ESS. Also
roaming across institutions using hierarchical RADIUS servers.
