-- First lecture not recorded --

---

# Networking

Class scheme of IP allows IANA to allocate large chunks of addresses to people
who need them and small chunks to those that need only a few. This scheme has
been historically successful but the growth of the Internet has revealed a
number of weaknesses. These days a classless allocation is used (CIDR). Thus
this allocation is classful. The process of allocating these addresses is
referred to as subnetting. It is very difficult to manage a class B network, it
has 64 thousand host addresses. The broadcast traffic (e.g. ARP) would be
completely unmanageable and there are a variety of physical/technical
limitations, plus political issues about keeping traffic separate. Therefore we
can split our networks into smaller networks with subnetting. This is done in a
similar way to the Internet, we just have to further split the host part into
some bits for the subnet, and the rest for hosts.

As hosts need to know where the bits are to be split up, there is no class
system, just a subnet mask. For example the UoB has a class B address 138.38 and
the Dept of Mathematical Sciences has a subnet consisting of addresses
138.38.96.0 to 138.38.103.255 (4096) address. Subnets only require changes to
local routing tables so they can be nested infinitely. This can be written as
138.38.96.0/21, where 21 is the number of 1 bits in the netmask.

You don't have to use only the top _n_ bits for a netmask but it is
overwhelmingly common to do so. The /n notation is only for a top-n-bit netmask.

Everybody wants a class B address because class C is too small and A is much too
large. This is called the _Three Bears Problem_. However there are now no class
B addresses left to buy, they're all allocated. It is possible to split some of
the class A networks down but everyone needs to update software to understand
that those addresses are no longer class A addresses. People will class A
networks guard them jealously and don't want to give them back. You can also
give multiple class C addresses, but it makes the routing messy. There are also
286 million reserved addresses in Class E, they wouldn't last long and the
software would regards Class E addresses are treated as illegal.

A while ago it was recognised that the growth of the Internet was such that we
would eventually need more addresses. There are three main solutions now.

- Change the way classes are defined and used (see above)
- Use private addresses with network address translation (NAT)
- Increases the number of addresses by change the IP

Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) takes class C networks and joins them
together in such a way that simplifies routing. Blocks of C addresses are
allocated to regions. e.g 194.0.0.0-195.255.255.255 is allocated to Europe. This
allows easier routing because anything that starts with 194/195 can be sent to
Europe. You can repeat the behaviour within each region: contiguous blocks are
allocated to ISPs or organisation. This is exactly like subnetting. This is a
very flexible and backwards-compatible scheme. End hosts do not need to know
about CIDR. Classless networks can still be subnetted. CIDR has allowed the
continued growth of the Internet well beyond the original possible size. We can
also do similar things with class A networks. In fact classful networks are no
longer used: CIDR is the only way addresses are currently allocated.

The second approach to address exhaustion is to move towards NAT. There are some
IP addresses that are reserved for private networks.

Class A: 10.0.0.0-10.255.255.255
Class B: 172.16.0.0-172.31.255.255
Class C: 192.168.0.0-192.168.255.255

These will never be allocated for public use on the Internet. Routers on the
public Internet will never forward packets with these addresses it will simply
drop them. They can be used by anyone locally for any purpose, and a common use
of that is NAT (network address translation). It uses the malleability of
packets to map many hosts onto a single address. A private network can be set up
using one of the above address ranges. A gateway host joins the private network
to the public Internet, modifying the addresses on packets as they go past. The
gateway needs to keep a record of connections from a member of the private
network to the world and recognise replies coming back. The gateway must be able
to distinguish replies for each member of the private network, even if they were
for the same destination. This is all doable in practice. A fortunate side
effect, NAT provides some level of protection for the hosts on the private
network as a member of the public Internet cannot initiate traffic to someone on
the private network as 10.0.1.1 is a private unroutable address.
