### Networking Lecture 02/10

-- Introductory BS --

The reason why networks are big is due to money, this is largely due to commerce and "big money" and this drives all the development of the web. Network is any means to connect entities together so they can communicate.

Motivation for networking:

  - Resource sharing - Sharing computing resources/information
  - Communication & collaboration - writing papers, working with other people, social
  - Information gathering - what's happening in the news today
  - Reliability through replication - redundant copies to increase availability of data/information
  - Entertainment - Brings money, watching films etc

There are many existing networks but the primary one is the Internet, other examples include telephone systems, mobile phone networks, TV & radio, cable etc.

Metcalfe's Law - `The value of a network expands exponentially as the number of users increases`

Network Classifications

  - LAN local area network, usually small scale, limited in size, usually can trust all users of the network
  - MAN metropolitan area network, usually medium scale, much larger and usually encompasses around a city size
  - WAN wide area network, huge scale network, inter country communication etc, requires different hardware and technologies
  - PAN, WPAN and many more.

You can additionally classify networks by technology - although commonly used as speed. Optical fibre networks are narrowband, for example. Narrowband and broadband denote the ranges of frequencies, narrow operates over a small range and broad over a larger range. Other technologies include Voiceband modem (V.92 standard) - this is a 'dial up' modem, ethernet, ADSL, optical fibre, DOCSIS, WiFi, 3G, satellite, they are not mutually exclusive you can additionally have hybrid networks using a combination of these. Wired networks have limit on size because electrical signals fade out over distances.

