# Networking

IPv4 Header Fields:

- Version. Four bit field containing the value 4. A later version of IP (IPv6)
    contains 6.
- Header Length. There are some optional fields so the header can vary in size
    so this is needed to distinguish the end of the header. Given as 4 byte
    words, four bits, maximum value 15 so maximum header length of 60 bytes.
- Type of service. An 8 bit field to indicate to a router how this datagram
    should be traded in terms of cost, speed and reliability (if possible). This
    is necessary because for audio, it is better to get data through quickly
    rather than 100% reliably as the human ear is more sensitive to gaps than
    occasional errors, however for a bank transfer, you would happily trade
    speed for reliability. This field is commonly referred to as Differentiated
    Services Field (DS field). This allows an implementation of QoS. The full of
    range of options is complicated and is inside RFC2474. It can include things
    such as:
      - Minimise delay. Do not hold onto this datagram longer than necessary and
          maybe even prioritise it over others.
      - Maximise throughput, not quite the same as minimising delay as it might
          be more efficient to send the packets in batches.
      - Maximise reliability. Try not to drop this datagram if the router is
          becoming overloaded; drop a different datagram first.
      - Minimise cost. For this datagram cost is more important than reliability
          or speed. This datagram can be delayed if it makes transmission
          cheaper.
- Early routers ignored the TOS field but these days QoS is very important.
    Modern routers do (or should) pay attention to the DS field. Here as in
    other parts of the IP specification a router may ignore some information if
    it wishes. IT might be the software is so old it does not recognise a modern
    field or it might simply be unable to make use of of the information. Hosts
    are strongly recommend to act on the information though.
- Total Length. Of the entire datagram including the header in bytes. 16 bits so
    gives a maximum size of 65535 bytes. This is much larger than domestic
    networks need but can be too small for high-speed networks. Larger packet
    sizes mean lower overheads as there is time spent splitting the data into
    packets, there is bandwidth overhead as each header is 20 or more bytes that
    is not data, and time overhead of the router unpacking the packet.
- Identification. 16 bits. A value that is unique to each datagram often
    incrementing by 1 for each successive datagram sent. This is used in
    *fragmentation*. The path a packet takes will vary based on the hardware
    used. Thus IP must face the problem of differing link layer properties in
    particular maximum packet size. If a big datagram hits a part of the
    Internet that only allows small datagrams there is a problem. IPv4 deals
    with this by fragmentation: a datagram can be subdivided by a router into
    several smaller datagrams; it is the destination's problem to glue them back
    together, in the right order.
- Flags. These are a set of three bits, two of which are used and one is
    reserved. RF is reserved for later use and must be 0. There is a suggested
    use in RFC3514. DF, stands for don't fragment. If a host can't, or doesn't
    want to, deal with fragments, then this bit is set to inform the routers on
    the path to the destination. A router might choose an alternative
    non-fragmenting route, or simply drop the datagram and send an error message
    back to the source which can then send smaller datagrams. All hosts are
    required to be able to accept datagrams of 576 bytes. MF, is the more
    fragments field, this means there are more fragments to come, i.e. this is
    not the last fragment. 
- Fragment offset. This shows where this fragment came from in the original
    datagram. It is a 13 bit field, giving the offset divided by 8. So a value
    of 20 means an offset of 160. Therefore each fragment must be a multiple of
    8. When fragmentation occurs every fragment has a copy of the original IP
    header, but with the fragmentation and length fields set appropriately for
    this particular fragment. In particular, all fragments of the original
    datagram have the same identification field value. When the fragment with
    MF=0 is received its fragment offset and length will give the length of the
    original. The destination can then reassemble the original datagram when all
    the fragments have arrived. As ever they can arrive in any order, or not at
    all. IPv4 spends a lot of effort coping with fragmentation, it is costly and
    should be avoided if possible. If a fragment is lost, the entire original
    must be retransmitted as there is no mechanism in IP to indicate which
    fragment was lost. Fragments are datagrams in their own right and can be
    themselves fragmented. Fragment processing software has a history of buggy
    implementations leading to hacked machines. Setting DF in the header
    prohibits fragmentation. If a router cannot avoid fragmenting it drops the
    datagram and returns a fragmentation needed but DF set error message back.
    The sender can then send smaller datagrams. This allows MTU Discovery. The
    Maximum Transmission Unit is the largest datagram a host or network can
    transmit. The path MTU is the smallest MTU for the entire path from source
    to destination. A datagram that is less than or equal in size to the MTU
    will never be fragmented.
- Time To Live. An eight bit counter used to limit the lifetime of a datagram.
    Poorly configured routers might bounce datagrams back and forth or in
    circles indefinitely thus clogging the network with lost datagrams. The TTL
    starts at 64 for example, and is reduced by one as it passes through each
    router. If TTL ever reaches 0, the datagram is discarded and an error
    message - time exceeded in-transit - is sent back to the source. This limits
    errant datagrams: eventually the TTL must reach 0 and the datagram is
    dropped. Eight bits means a maximum path of 255, this seems long enough for
    the current Internet: there are no valid paths as long as this are known.
    Originally the TTL was to be a measure of real time, reducing by one for
    each second in a router. In practice no implementations did this but just
    decremented by one regardless. This is now the expected behaviour. This is
    another example of IP being pragmatic.
- Protocol. This eight bit field connects the IP layer to the transport layer.
    This is a value indicating which transport layer to pass the datagram to.
    For example, UDP is 17 and TCP is 6.
- Header checksum. As for the Ethernet is a simple function of the bytes in the
    IP header. If the checksum is bad, the datagram is silently dropped. A high
    layer must detect this and perform whatever action is needs. Remember that
    IP is not a guaranteed reliable layer. The checksum includes the TTL field
    so it must be recomputed by each router the datagram passes through.
