### Networking

# Ethernet

Ethernet is moving faster all using the same basic CSMA/CD protocol but using
differing electrical signalling. Ethernet cards can auto-negotiate to select the
optimum speed. It is not just a case of increasing the frequency of the signal
there are other complications to get around the limitations of the cable.
Gigabit over copper cable is very complicated hardware as it uses all wires in
the cable in both directions simultaneously, and gigabit CSMA/CD requires
*carrier extension* to make the packets big enough to spot collisions. It
compensates for this loss of performance with packet bursting where several
frames are sent in a single bunch. Once you get higher than gigabit (10Gb/s+) it
is required to use a full duplex switched only, no more CSMA/CD. These mostly
require optical fibre cables however up to 40Gb/s can run over Cat8 twisted
pair. There are additionally longer distance variants to deliver networking to
the home, these are usually called Ethernet to the Home (ETTH) or Ethernet in
the first mile, mostly working with optical fibre cables.

When transmitting the bits physically, the encoding is important because if you
take the naive solution of 0V for 0 and 1V for 1 running at 10Mhz, an empty
network and a stream of 0's looks the same. Also bits need to be synchronised to
prevent drifting out of step. A long stream of 1's would have to be a steady 1V;
this is an electrically bad design, an average of 0V is best. To connect devices
easily you need an AC signal not a DC one. To get around this 10Mb/s Ethernet
uses a **Manchester Encoding**. 

- Split the time interval for a bit into two parts
- Vary the voltage during that time such that Low->High is a 0 and High->Low
    would be a 1.

This means that the average is 0V, and the actual voltage is -0.85V for low,
+0.85V for high. This is easy to synchronise as the transit through 0V is the
middle of a bit. This does double the frequency of the signal to 20Mhz. We can
use Cat 4 (or better) cable for this. The Manchester encoding solves all the
problems with the naive implementation and simplifies the hardware as it is
described as *self clocking*.

However for 100Mb/s Ethernet, we can't even use Cat 5 cables because it is only
rated for 100Mhz and ME requires 200Mhz. Instead we start encoding 4 data bits
as 5 physical bits in a 4B/5B encoding. e.g. 0000 becomes 11110. There are also
some control patterns e.g. IDLE 11111. It could seem like this has made things
works but actually we can now use MLT-3 which is a 3 level physical encoding.
This has +, - and 0 levels, again using transitions to encoding the bits. The
transitions are cyclical. A transition from one state to another marks a 1 and
no transition marks a 0. By ensuring that each encoded set of 4 bits has at
least two transitions we can get a roughly 0V average. 

A physical representation is called a symbol. Symbols need not be binary and do
not necessarily represent a whole number of bits. The number of symbols per
second is called the *baud rate*.

In the case of 100Mb/s Ethernet the clock rate is 31.25Mhz with a 125MBaud: all
1s output is four transitions. Because the data rate is only 100Mb/s this means
that it is 80% efficient as expected because 4 bits become 5 bits.

For Gigabit Ethernet 1000Base-T: 8 bits become 4x3 physical bits in a
continuously changing encoding (not a table lookup). Each 3 bit chunk is encoded
using transitions between 5 levels (PAM-5). Over all four pairs in the cable
simultaneously, in both directions on all pairs. 10Gb Ethernet uses a PAM-16
over a very complicated coding (Tomlinson-Harashima Precoding). The end result
is that Ethernet is very complicated.

# ADSL

Before digital networks were common the physical layer of choice was an acoustic
modem using the existing analogue telephone network. This used **MOD**ulation
and **DEM**odulation to convert bits into acoustic symbols (sounds). After
analogue, there were the first digital systems on public telephone networks, an
example of this was ISDN(Integrated Services Digital Network). Asymmetric
Digital Subscriber Line(ADSL) is currently a popular method of delivery to the
home.  Analogue modems are limited to 56Kb/s, the maximum speed available from a
standard analogue telephone line where all frequencies apart from a 3kHz chunk
centred on the human voice are filtered out and thrown away. The telephone wire
is capable of more and ADSL tries to take advantage of this. ADSL is just one in
a series of DSL standards, collectively called xDSL. The asymmetric in ADSL
refers to the non-symmetric splitting of this bandwidth into uplink (->internet)
and downlink (->user) chunks. This asymmetry is appropriate for the home user
who will only be sending a little data along the uplink and who expects a lot of
data down the downlink. This is why upload rates are often significantly slower
than download rates. This asymmetry is *not* appropriate for a business that
wants to run a web server, as they spend most of their time sending data, they
might choose to use SDSL, symmetric DSL. ADSL also keeps the voice channel, the
*plain old telephone system* (POTS). This is why you no longer had to put the
phone down to use the Internet unlike dialup. Only a certain amount of bandwidth
is available on the wire: limited by the quality of the wire, its length, local
electrical interference and so on. Bits are encoding using discrete multi-tone
(DMT). DMT splits the available frequency range (0Hz to 1.104MHz) into 256
channels of 4kHz. Channels 1-6 are used for telephony including the voice
channel. Each channel encodes as many bits as the current environment allows:
possible 0 to 15 bits/Hz. A noisy channel might encode only one or two bits/Hz.
Other channels outside the interference can encode at their full data rate. This
is the true meaning of broadband, meaning using several frequency channels at
once. Available bandwidth degrades as the wire length increases, the practical
limit is roughly about 5-6km, after this the number of bits in all channels
reduces to 0. Original ADSL was 2Mb/s down and 256kb/s up but these have got
faster more recently. Other DSLs have different speeds.
