Some APs have Wifi Protected Setup (WPS), a simplified way of setting up
wireless security. Design for those people who find typing in a password too
challenging. It is seriously broken and should be disabled on your AP. 

The frame layout for WiFi is the same as Ethernet(2017-10-12-lec.md). In
particular it has the same format MAC addresses. This allows the transparent
mixing of WiFi and Ethernet in a single network. An AP can pass on a WiFi frame
unchanged to an Ethernet and vice versa. This is a good argument for
sub-dividing the physical layer. The IEEE suggest:

- Physical Medium Attachment (PMA) for frames
- Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS) for things like 4B/5B
- Physical Medium Dependent (PMD)

Many other wireless networks exist from local to wide-area. Bluetooth givs short
range point-to-point communication. It has a range of roughly 10m, it was
designed this way to use low power. It also uses the 2.4Ghz band as WiFi. It is
not really designed to run IP but can by layer a suitable protocol. See PPP.

There are MAN wireless protocols such as WiMax(IEEE 802.16 Wireless Man),
designed to go around 30 miles, can go at around 2Mb/s to 155Mb/s depending on
regulations on power transmissions. Originally it was intended for the last mile
problem. Is not taking off in a big way as people prefer 3G or 4G cellular
systems. Many other numbers are available.

The first important digital cellular system was Global System for Mobile
Communications (GSM). This has been retrospectively been named 2G and had data
rates of around 9.6Kb/s to 14.4Kb/s. Something called High Speed Circuit
Switched Data (HSCSD) takes this up to 57.6Kb/s, GPRS(General Packet Radio
Service) was packet based and took it up to 171.2Kb/s over several GSM channels.
Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE) uses better encodings to get up to
384Kb/s again using several channels. EDGE was used by earlier 3G systems.
High-Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA) ups this to 42.2Mb/s and Evolved High
Speed Packet Access (HSPA+) will do 168Mb/s. 4G is now well established using
Long Term Evolution(LTE) with the promise of up to 300Mb/s. Marketed as 4G it
originally did not meet the proposed 4G standard as it did not support 1Gb/s for
a stationary host. The ITU eventually gave in and changed the definition of 4G
to allow for LTE as it was the best technical solution out. LTE is data traffic
only and does not have a voice channel. Currently on most LTE systems if you
want to make a voice call it has to drop back to 3G or even 2G. Just being
introduced is voice over LTE (VoLTE) using a suitable digital encoding of sound.
5G is coming maybe in around 2020? There seems to be an upgrade roughly every 10
years. It promises to use the available spectrum much more efficiently than 4G.
The latest specs indicate users connected to a base station will share 20Gb/s
download and 10Gb/s upload rates. And base stations will support millions of
devices per square mile. A device will be able to connect even if it is moving
at 500mph and latencies will be 0.4ms as opposed to the current 20ms on LTE.

Satellite networks can be used outside of urban environments. There are two main
variants. There is the one way satellite: this employs the usual asymmetry. Data
away from the home travels by telephone wire and data towards the home travels
through a satellite connection. So uploads are very slow over the telephone wire
and downloads come via the satellite. There is also a symmetric two-way
satellite connection which requires more expensive equipment in the home but is
not reliant on the wire and provides faster data rates for upload. Satellites
are very expensive to put up and to run. The signal has a very large latency
too, about 1/10 second which is noticeable in highly interactive applications
like games. It does however cover a large area with a reasonably good bandwidth.

The reason for so many physical layer implementations is that there are many
requirements for networks. However as you move up the layers the amount of
variety decreases drastically.
