# Networking

### UDP

UDP is a very thin layer on top of IP. It is as reliable or unreliable as the IP
it runs on. It is just about as fast and efficient as IP, with only a small
overhead. UDP is widely used as it is good in two areas:

- One shot applications, where we have a single request and reply. For example
    DNS.
- Where a fast response is required. We have no overhead in setting up a
    connection before data can be exchanged.
- Where speed is more important than accuracy. For example, media streaming
    where the occasional lost packet is not a problem but a slow packet is.

No provision is made for lost or duplicated packets in UDP. Any application that
uses UDP must deal with these issues itself. For example DNS over UDP sets a
timer when a request is sent. If the reply takes too long in coming assume the
request or the reply was lost and resend the request. TCP is required as we need
a way of reliably sending data.

### TCP

The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is the transport layer for a reliable,
connection-oriented protocol. It is often called "TCP/IP" because it is only
ever implemented on top of IP. It is hugely more complicated than UDP as it must
create a reliable transport from the unreliable IP it runs on. There is a lot of
complication to deal with the error cases such as packet loss and packet
duplication. There is overhead in setting up and tearing down the connection to
manage these mechanisms, and further complexity to improve performance and flow
control.

The basis of the reliability is the use of acknowledgement (ACK) packets for
every packet sent. IF host A sends B a packet, B must send an ACK packet back to
A to inform it of the safe arrival of the packet. If A does not receive an ACK,
it resends that packet. An ACK on its own does not solve the whole problem
though. This is due to the "Two Armies Problem". _Suppose two armies A and B
wish to coordinate an attack on C. A sends a message to B: "attack at dawn". How
does A know that B got the message? A cannot safely attack until it knows B is
ready.  So B sends an acknowledgement to A: "OK" but the ACK might be
intercepted and A might not get the ACK. B can't attack until it knows that A
got the ACK. So A has to send an ACK for the ACK back to B. But this might not
go through... and so on"._ TCP avoids the Two Armies Problem by using time-outs
and packet retransmissions. For every packet: A starts a retransmission timer
when it sends to B. If the timer runs out before it gets an ACK it resends the
packet and restarts the timer. Repeat until A gets an ACK (or A gives up).
Problems to solve include:
- how long to wait before resend? This might be a slow but otherwise reliable
    link and resending will just clog the system with extra packets?
- how many times to resend before giving up? It might be the destination has
    gone away entirely (perhaps unplugged or crashed)
- how long B should before sending the ACK? You can piggyback an ACK on an
    ordinary data packet so it may be better for B to wait until some data is
    ready to be returned rather than sending an otherwise empty ACK. This saves
    on packets sent.
- IP packets can arrive out of order so we need some way to recognise which ACK
    goes with which packet
- how to maintain order in the data? As IP packets can arrive out of order, we
    need some way of reassembling the original data stream in the correct order.
- how to manage duplicates? Resends can duplicate packets so we need some way to
    recognise and discard extra copies.
TCP packets are often called segments.

See slide 61 for the TCP header layout.

Port numbers for source and destination: The ports are identical to UDP, as UDP
copied TCP. Following this are two 32 bit values, which are _sequence_ and
_acknowledgement_. These numbers are the heart of TCP's reliability. Every byte
in a TCP connection is numbered. The 32 bit sequence number starts at some
random value and increases by 1 for each byte sent. So if a segment contains 10
bytes of data the sequence number of the next segment sent will be 10 greater.
The destination acknowledges those bytes it has received by setting the
acknowledgement field. The ACK field is only active if the ACK flag is set. The
reverse connection from destination to source has its own sequence number as TCP
is fully duplex. Everything for the forward flow is true for data travelling in
the reverse direction: the reverse traffic has its own independent sequence
numbers and flow control. A destination might not immediately get the whole
segment that was sent due to fragmentation in the IP layer. In this case TCP
must wait fro all the fragments and reconstruct the segment before it can send
the ACK. Another reason to avoid fragmentation. The returning ACK field contains
the sequence number of the next byte the destination expects to receive. e.g. If
the sequence number is 20000 and 14 bytes are received it returns 20015. ACKS
can be piggybacked on normal returning data packets, they don't _need_ to be
separate packets. This helps reduce the amount of data packets. If a source
receives 3 duplicate ACKS for a packet it must resend that packet.

TCP header also has 4 bit header length: measured in 32 bit words: the header
can have options so is of variable length. Maximum is 60 bytes. Minimum is 20
bytes. It also has many flags performing various functions, and 16 bits of
advertised window size: for flow control. TCP implements flow control, i.e.
adjusting the rate of sending packets up or down to make best use of current
conditions (a) in the network and (b) in the receiving host. The advertising
window deals with (b). The destination has only a limited amount of buffer
memory it can store new segments in.  If the application is not reading the data
as fast as it arrives, the buffer will fill up. The window size is the amount of
buffer left: the receiver sends this value in each segment going back to the
client. If the amount is very small, the client can slow down sending until
space is freed up. 16 bits gives a maximum buffer of 65535 bytes: much too small
for modern hosts that have megabytes to play with. There is a header option to
scale this up to something reasonable.
