### Networking

Continued from previous lecture...

The presentation layer or layer 6 provides some features so that it is not required to reimplement them in each application. In particular it decides on representations of data such as characters, integers and floating point values so that the source and destination can agree. This is so that the data that ends up at the other end isn't completely garbled. This means that it is independent of how each host chooses to represent data. 

The application layer, or layer 7 is the layer that 'application programmers' use. This contains protocols such as HTTP for the Web, SMTP for email etc. You will find applications built on top of these protocols such as Firefox or Chrome for the web, Pine or Thunderbird for email. 

Conceptually data from an application is passed down through the layers until it reaches the hardware, i.e the physical layer. This will be through a sequence of various different pieces of software that perform the functions of each layer. The data is encapsulated in some way such that the data can be dealt with transparently by the layer below and can be untransformed back again. The transformations can be anything but some examples might be:

  - Add an identifying header or trailer or both that is needed for functionality
  - Encode certain bit patterns that might be misinterpreted or mistransmitted by the next layer
  - Put items in a standard form e.g integers into a known format
  - Do some arbitrarily complicated manipulation
  - Or they might do nothing at all, transformations are not required

An example of why encapsulation is required is become some early modems treated byte values of less than 32 as commands to the modem not data to be transmitted. Value 4 might mean 'end of transmission' and the modem should drop the connection. This presents a problem should the data contain the value 4, if you send it the modem will just close the connection. To solve this we must find some way of getting rid of the 4's in our data, the solution that was used was called "byte stuffing", the link layer would replace `04` with `DB D4`. The DB here is called an escape character. This actually presents it's own problem if the data contains the value `DB D4`. We must then also stuff the escape character as something else, for example `DB FF`. With byte stuffing we exchange some expansion to ensure correct transmission.

Email example in slide. The primary idea is that all layers should be as far decoupled from one another as possible, and each layer will add it's own encapsulations so on down the layers - all the layers should be ignorant of the upper layers.

If the original data is small the the data transmitted on the wire might mostly be encapsulation overhead and adds additional complexity and this reduces the effective throughput. This is mostly because you just can't as in the modem example. However in reality, encapsulation reduces overall complexity, in a similar way to breaking large programs into functions and objects does for programming. It gives us flexibility because each layer can represent things in it's own way as long as they pass something that next layer can understand. Because of this we can replace layers and implementations for those layers without affecting the other layers. RFC1149 april fools joke.

Some people believe the hardware layer should be split into layers describing the physical medium and a layer describing the actual signalling. IEEE802 splits the physical layer into three sublayers and the link layer into two sublayers.

Others prefer fewer layers, for example the Internet model which consists of 4 layers which was developed to match the Internet Protocol.

  - Link layer
  - Network layer
  - Transport layer
  - Application layer

The Internet link layer corresponds to the OSI physical plus data link layers and the model doesn't describe this layer in great detail and it says that it must be capable of sending and receiving the next layer packets. The way hardware behaves is very much left to the reader. Examples of this are Ethernet, ADSL and WiFi.

The next layer is the network or "Internet" layer and corresponds to the same OSI layer. It describes routing and how packets move around the network. In TCP/IP the Internet Protocol is defined in this layer. IP is an unreliable protocol, this means that it doesn't guarantee delivery of packets. This helpful in some applications because it is better to deal with the occasional lost packet than to hold up the system while the lost packet is rerequested and resent e.g. video where fast delivery is more important than accurate delivery - humans are unlikely to notice a single dropped frame.

The transport layer corresponds also to the OSI transport layer providing a flow of packets between source and destination. In TCP/IP there are two protocols defined, the *transmission control protocol* (TCP) and *user datagram protocol* (UDP). TCP makes IP reliable which has many packet acknowledgments. UDP on the other hand is as unreliable as the IP. It was devised after TCP when people realised that it can be useful to have unreliable delivery, hence why the protocol is called TCP/IP. Packets will have a header field that indicates the protocol type. TCP is number 6 and UDP is 17.

The application layer roughly covers the OSI session, presentation and application layers. This means in particular that Internet applicatiosn must take care of presentation issues if they want to be interoperable. Many forget this for example some Web servers serving pages that do not display properly on all Web browsers.

In terms of implementation, typically all the layers below application will be implemented by an OS kernel. This is because the system resources must be shared fairly amongst applications. The application layer must be implemented by the application programmer.
