# Networking

### IPv6

The _next header_ field daisy-chains options called extension headers or gives
the protocol (TCP/UDP) of the next layer. The only limit on the options is the
total datagram limit. Most options are not even looked at by routers, to improve
speed. Some optional headers include:

- Routing options c.f loose source routing in IPv4
- Authentication
- Security
- Jumbograms: packets up to 4gb in length
- And many more!

Note that the type of the option header is given by the previous option header,
or in the case of the first option, the main IPv6 header. As there is no
fragmentation in IPv6, end hosts are expected to use path MTU discovery to find
the MTU, or alternatively just send packets no larger than 1280 bytes.

IPv4 address allocations have run out. Therefore the Internet needs to move to
IPv6. It is expensive to make this transition as it needs software rewrites, so
many people (ISPs, websites etc) are pretending the problem does not exist. Even
though the majority of modern routers and end hosts contain the necessary IPv6
software. We can't turn off the Internet and replace v4 by v6 overnight. By
deliberate design the two protocols can run side by side on the same network.
IPv6 was devised in 1996, but has yet to achieve mainstream use. As of August
2017 figures from akamai.com say that around 13% of UK traffic is IPv6, compared
to Belgium and the USA which are at 46% and 40% respectively. Most countries are
sub 10%. Companies such as Google are supporting IPv6 connections, as they want
to encourage the transition but many ISPs do not, so home users cannot make use
of this.

IPv4 has three types of address:

- Unicast: an address refers to a single destination (ignoring NAT)
- Broadcast: as in the link layer a single packet goes to every host in the
    local network, but now the "network" is at the IP layer so may comprise more
    than one link layer network.
- Multicast: in between unicast and broadcast. A single packet goes to one or
    more hosts.

IPv6 adds:

- Anycast: a packet goes to any one of a selection of servers, usually the
    "closest" in some sense.

IPv6 also removes broadcast addresses as its job can be done by multicast.

Broadcast addresses are simple, it will always goes to all hosts and scales
well. There must however be some limit on the broadcast or the entire Internet
would be permanently flooded.

- Limited broadcast. The address 255.255.255.255 sends to all hosts on the local
    network. A packet with this address is never forwarded by a router. Useful
    when you don't know the local network address.
- Subnet-directed broadcast. All hosts on the local subnet. An address with a
    valid subnet part and a host part all ones. E.g. 172.16.1.255 on the subnet
    172.16.1/24. This is the most common form of broadcast.

There are some other kinds of broadcast addresses but they have been obsoleted
by CIDR.

As mentioned, IPv6 does not support broadcast separately so there are no IPv6
broadcast addresses per say, it uses multicasts. Multicast is useful for
streaming radio, for example, as instead of sending individual unicast packets
to each listening host but it is much simpler to send a single packet that the
listening hosts pick up and the non-listening hosts don't. We can't use
broadcast as broadcast is network-limited: perhaps listeners are spread far and
wide over multiple networks. In IPv4, class D addresses are reserved for
multicast (224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255). Multicast groups are formed from those
hosts that wish to received packets from a given source. A multicast group id is
a 28 bit number with no further structure, about 270 million possible groups.
The set of hosts listening to a particular multicast address is a host group.
Host groups can cross multiple networks and there is no limit on the size of a
group and generally you can't know how big the group is. Some group addresses
are preallocated by IANA: the permanent host groups:

- 224.0.0.1: all multicast aware hosts on this subnet
- 224.0.0.2: all multicast routers on this subnet

As implied by those reserved addresses not all IPv4 hosts support all of
multicasting, for example level 0 means no support, level 1 can send multicast
but not receive and finally level 2 can send and receive multicast packets. The
process of joining and leaving groups is governed by the Internet Group
Management Protocol(IGMP). A host that wishes to join a multicast group provided
by a server sends an IGMP message towards the server. The routers on the path to
the server take note and so know to route multicast packets for this group
towards the joining host. The server itself is not interested or involved in the
IGMP message. Similarly for a host leaving a group: a host is supposed to send
an IGMP message towards the server that the routers can read and act upon. Extra
complications arise as hosts may not always send group leave messages, so there
is more protocol to monitor and maintain groups using timeouts and maintenance
messages. TTL plays a special role in multicast on IPv4: it defines the scope of
a group, which is how wide an area a group may range over.

- `0` Host
- `1` Subnet
- `<32` Organisation
- `<64` Region
- `<128` Continent
- `<255` Global

The definition of organisation, region etc is left open for the networking
administration to define as they wish. Routers are set to discard multicast
packets that would cross a boundary.

In IPv6 the corresponding protocol is Multicast Listener Discovery and forms
part of a larger protocol ICMPv6. IPv6 multicast is much as v4 but simplified.
The top 8 bits of the address are 1, 4 bits for flags, 4 bits for scope and 112
bits for multicast group IP. Multicast looks good but is not used as much as it
should be. It is used in routing protocols, but relatively little elsewhere.
Multicast is complicated to use for an on-demand system as it requires everyone
in the group to be receiving the same thing at the same time. There has been
some experimentation with hybrid systems (a buffer-up unicast burst followed by
a multicast stream) but not much update. Most big providers rely on having many
local distribution points containing identical data.  While multicast is ideal
for live broadcasting services, most home users to do not support multicast as
routing companies want to avoid supporting this because it adds undue complexity
as each groups needs extra state in  every router the multicast traffic passes
through, making scaling to the full Internet a problem. A router must keep a
record of all multicast paths passing through it so routers on popular paths
might need to keep a large amount of data. Mutlicast is used by some pay-tv
services but usually in the context of a closed and controllable system, e.g. an
institutional intranet multicasting a seminar or holding a multiway video
conference. Generally this is only in the case where the same institution owns
all the infrastructure from source to destinations.

Anycast sends a single packet to a single destination chosen out of many. An
example of a usecase for this is replicated Web servers. One could have many
servers around the world with identical content and the same anycast address. A
browser would get pages from the closest server thus sharing load. This only
works with connectionless protocols as multiple requests might go to different
servers: this doesn't fit well with connection oriented protocols. An anycast is
any unicast address that just happens to be assigned to more than one server.
It is the responsibility of the routers to figure this out. There are also
anycast groups with a join/leave protocol. Anycast has lots of potential but we
need to be using IPv6 to use it.

All of this begs the question, how does a host get an IP address? An Ethernet
address is burned into the hardware so there's no problem there. IP addresses
are software addresses so they must be set up somehow. The simplest way is for
the host to be simply configured to have that address stored in a configuration
file on the host somewhere. An administrator takes into account certain
criteria. It is not always feasible to do this manual process. Enter DHCP. The
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol is used for a machine to get an IP address.
When a host boots and needs an IP address, it makes a DHCP broadcast. In
contrast to ARP, with DHCP there is usually just one host that is configured to
respond to DHCP requests as allocations of addresses must be centrally managed
to avoid duplication. This is also usually a request to 255.255.255.255. A DHCP
server listens for such requests; it will choose a currently unused IP address
and send it back to the requesting client. The value might be chosen by the
server according to some defined policy or more usually, the next free address
taken from a list of currently unused addresses. The client gets this reply and
reads its IP address which it can then use to configure itself.

- the client broadcasts "Who can do DHCP with me?" (DHCPDISCOVER message)
- one or more servers broadcast a reply: "I will. Here's an address" (DHCPOFFER)
- the client picks a server and broadcasts "Can I have that address please?"
    (DHCP request)
- The chosen server broadcasts "Ok, it's yours" (DHCPACK)
- Finally, the client sets its IP address

DHCP is an extension of an earlier protocol called BOOTP, both of these extend
RARP. RARP is at the link layer, while DHCP runs on top of a transport layer
(UDP) on top of IP. DHCP provides much more than simple addresses. It runs over
UDP over IP so DHCP packets must have IP source and destination addresses. The
client doesn't yet know it's own IP address or any server's address but it must
fill in the IP address fields with something.

Source: 0.0.0.0
Destination: 255.255.255.255

Packets returning from the DHCP server will hae the server's IP address as
source, and the broadcast 255.255.255.255 as destination. A DHCP server has a
pool of available addresses that it can assign to hosts as they need them. When
a host leaves a network, it should send a DHCPRELEASE to the DHCP server. Not
all clients are well behaved or might have crashed before sending a release. To
fix this, DHCP gives a lease time on an address. The address is usable by the
requesting host for this period of time. If the lease expires the host can
request a renewal of the lease from the server. This will grant a further lease
on the address. The renewal request and reply can be a normal unicast
interchange as the client already has an IP address. If a host leaves the
network or crashes a renewal request will not be forthcoming. The lease time can
be configured by the DHCP server's administrator. A short period is used when
tehre is a fast turnover of machines. A long period, up to infinity is used for
more permanent machines e.g. desktops. DHCP can supply many other things too.

After getting a new address, a client can broadcast an ARP reply containing it's
new address.
